---
title: "Collisions of localized patterns in a nonvariational Swift-Hohenberg equation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-MR-PRE
excerpt: 'The cubic-quintic Swift-Hohenberg equation (SH35) has been proposed as an order parameter description of several convective systems with reflection symmetry in the layer midplane, including binary fluid convection. We use numerical continuation, together with extensive direct numerical simulations (DNSs), to study SH35 with an additional nonvariational quadratic term to model the effects of breaking the midplane reflection symmetry.'
date: 2023-06-27
venue: 'Physical Review E'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.107.064214'
citation: 'Mathi Raja, Adrian van Kan, Benjamin Foster, and Edgar Knobloch.
 Phys. Rev. E.  <b> 107 </b>, 064214.'
---
The cubic-quintic Swift-Hohenberg equation (SH35) has been proposed as an order parameter description of several convective systems with reflection symmetry in the layer midplane, including binary fluid convection. We use numerical continuation, together with extensive direct numerical simulations (DNSs), to study SH35 with an additional nonvariational quadratic term to model the effects of breaking the midplane reflection symmetry. The nonvariational structure of the model leads to the propagation of asymmetric spatially localized structures (LSs). An asymptotic prediction for the drift velocity of such structures, derived in the limit of weak symmetry breaking, is validated numerically. Next, we present an extensive study of possible collision scenarios between identical and nonidentical traveling structures, varying a temperaturelike control parameter. These collisions are inelastic and result in stationary or traveling structures. Depending on system parameters and the types of structures colliding, the final state may be a simple bound state of the initial LSs, but it can also be longer or shorter than the sum of the two initial states as a result of nonlinear interactions. The Maxwell point of the variational system, where the free energy of the global pattern state equals that of the trivial state, is shown to have no bearing on which of these scenarios is realized. Instead, we argue that the stability properties of bound states are key. While individual LSs lie on a modified snakes-and-ladders structure in the nonvariational SH35, the multipulse bound states resulting from collisions lie on isolas in parameter space, disconnected from the trivial solution. In the gradient SH35, such isolas are always of figure-eight shape, but in the present nongradient case they are generically more complex, although the figure-eight shape is preserved in a small subset of cases. Some of these complex isolas are shown to terminate in T-point bifurcations. A reduced model is proposed to describe the interactions between the tails of the LSs. The model consists of two coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs) capturing the oscillatory nature of SH35 profiles at the linear level. It contains three parameters: two interaction amplitudes and a phase, whose values are deduced from high-resolution DNSs using gradient descent optimization. For collisions leading to the formation of simple bound states, the reduced model reproduces the trajectories of LSs with high quantitative accuracy. When nonlinear interactions lead to the creation or deletion of wavelengths, the model performs less well. Finally, we propose an effective signature of a given interaction in terms of net attraction or repulsion relative to free propagation. It is found that interactions can be attractive or repulsive in the net, irrespective of whether the two closest interacting extrema are of the same or opposite signs. Our findings highlight the rich temporal dynamics described by this bistable nonvariational SH35, and show that the interactions in this system can be quantitatively captured, to a significant extent, by a highly reduced ODE model.

[Access paper here](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.107.064214)

Recommended citation: Mathi Raja, Adrian van Kan, Benjamin Foster, and Edgar Knobloch.
 Phys. Rev. E.  <b> 107 </b>, 064214.