---
title: "Elastic fingering in a Hele-Shaw cell"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-PRE
excerpt: 'We consider the steady-state fingering instability of an elastic membrane separating two fluids of different density under external pressure in a rotating Hele-Shaw cell.'
date: 2023-06-22
venue: 'Physical Review E'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.107.065104'
citation: 'Benjamin Foster and Edgar Knobloch.
 Phys. Rev. E.  <b> 107 </b>, 065104.'
---
We consider the steady-state fingering instability of an elastic membrane separating two fluids of different density under external pressure in a rotating Hele-Shaw cell. Both inextensible and highly extensible membranes are considered, and the role of membrane tension is detailed in each case. Both systems exhibit a centrifugally driven Rayleigh-Taylor-like instability when the density of the inner fluid exceeds that of the outer one, and this instability competes with the restoring forces arising from curvature and tension, thereby setting the finger scale. Numerical continuation is used to compute not only strongly nonlinear primary finger states up to the point of self-contact, but also secondary branches of mixed modes and circumferentially localized folds as a function of the rotation rate and the externally imposed pressure. Both reflection-symmetric and symmetry-broken chiral states are computed. The results are presented in the form of bifurcation diagrams. The ratio of system scale to the natural length scale is found to determine the ordering of the primary bifurcations from the unperturbed circle state as well as the solution profiles and onset of secondary bifurcations.

[Access paper here](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.107.065104)

Recommended citation: Benjamin Foster and Edgar Knobloch.
 Phys. Rev. E  <b> 107 </b>, 065104.